---
layout: post
title: 'George Simmel (1858-1918)'
permalink: '/study/reference/people/george-simmel.html'
tag: 'people'
---

A German philosopher and sociologist, Georg Simmel (1858-1918) is frequently cited as one of the founders of sociology. His work is at times impressionistic, covering a wide range of issues and ideas. His most consistent and rigorous development of a sociology is known as formal sociology. In it he studies the forms that govern diverse social relationships (such as triadic and dyadic relationships, or relationships of superordination and subordination). The study of forms extends to the examination of various types or roles under which humans are labelled and organise their actions (such as the stranger, the adventurer, the miser, the prostitute) and looks at diverse phenomena of contemporary social life, including fashion (Simmel 1957), the city (Simmel 1950b) and sexuality (Oakes 1984). Because many of his finest and most insightful writings are in essay form, rather than in the form of extended and rigorously defended treatises, his foundational position is more contested than that of Marx, Weber or Durkheim. Simmel has, however, much to offer, particularly in understanding the experience of the individual in contemporary society.

At the centre of his approach to sociology is the question: ‘How is society possible?’ (Simmel 1959). Society is made up of a large number of individuals, all pursuing their own interests and concerns, with minimal attention to the interests of others (beyond, perhaps, close friends and regular acquaintances). Yet, the result of all these individual actions is a stable, organised and generally quite predictable social whole. Simmel therefore wants to account for this stability. The philosopher Kant had posed the question ‘How is nature possible?’ in his Critique of Pure Reason (1781). His solution had involved arguing that nature is actually unified only by the human observer. In effect, all the diverse bits of nature are brought together into an ordered and predictable whole by the human mind. Simmel points out that the unity of society need not depend upon any external observer. Rather, society’s unity depends upon the active participation of all its members. More concretely, he argues that the organisation of society is not the result of planning or of a conspiracy by some elite. Thus a bureaucracy, for example, is a very untypical form of social organisation. He observes that the elements that make up society (human beings) are conscious and creative beings. Human beings expect society to have order and stability, and even a predestination, as if society had been made especially for them. In addition, human beings come to social relationships armed with a wide range of skills and concepts (or types and forms) that allow them to find and create coherence in those situations. Humans therefore continually work hard — although perhaps without noticing it — in order to create and maintain at least an appearance of the order that they expect to be there.

Human beings do not have a grasp of society as a whole, but they are generally knowledgeable of the rules and conventions that govern their relationships with and behaviour towards others. He gives the example of a game of chess. To an outsider, unfamiliar with the rules, the movements of the players are mysterious. While seemingly coordinated and structured, they have no meaning. It could all be a strange ballet, choreographed by some third party. To the chess player, the movements are not simply meaningful, but are meaningful because each player is responding to his or her opponent’s acts, through the common recognition of a set of rules. The players can anticipate and interpret the (immensely subtle) actions of their opponents. Simmel therefore anticipates much that comes to fruition in symbolic interactionism and phenomenological approaches to society.

