---
layout: post
title: 'BEVAE 181 Assignment'
permalink: '/study/assignments/bevae-181.html'
---


#### “Sustainable development is an ideal goal towards which all human societies need to be moving”. Justify the statement in about 250 words.

Sustainable development is the ultimate goal of any human society since it promises to ensure the welfare of the all people living in the society. If there are irreparable damages to the environment, then there may circumstances which will lead to ultimate destruction of the human society along with other environmental entities. Following are the three major aspects vide which, sustainable development could be maintained for the welfare of the society. 
Economic growth: Among all other aspects of human life, economic growth takes a major role in driving the society. There may instances where sustainability may be seen as hindrance to the economic growth, that is not always true as it has been proven in various industries which have successfully achieved the same without destroying the environment. The industries which have taken environmental responsibility more seriously are also more likely to succeed at modern times than the other ones. 
Energy supply: Energy is also one of the main driving forces of the energy. Since centuries, the society was depended upon non renewable sources of energy which on one hand, are very limited in amount which is depleting day by day where as burning them also creates environmental hazards. Hence, green energy such as solar energy gives the opportunity to sustain more than other non renewable energy sources. 
Human survival: While considering the growth of the other sectors, one should also keep in mind about the survival of the human society. Due to global warming as a result continuous emission of greenhouse gases, the environment has been becoming more and more unfavorable to living beings with rise of sea level. There may come a point when due to natural calamities as an aggregation of above factors, the whole mankind may cease to exist. Hence growth makes sense only when other factors are taken under consideration 

#### Differentiate between the following terms by giving suitable examples in about 125 words each:

**(a) Genetic and species diversity**

Genetic diversity is the variation in the genes which carry information from one generation to the next generation. It is genetic diversity that allows a species to adapt to the changing situation so that the probability of the survival increases. It is a trait of the species since it deals with the hereditary unit i.e. the genes of a species. On the other hand, species diversity refers to the differences between species in a community. Species diversity is the visible components of bio diversity since it deals with outward traits unlike genetic diversity which are inward and cannot be visible in short period of time. Not to mention, species diversity is related to the number and the distribution of species in a particular area of bi diversity. 

**(b) Direct and indirect use value of biodiversity**

Direct values can be attributed to those goods the values of which can be ensured directly. For example, food or timber etc. falls under direct values in bio – diversity because they ensure the values directly. It also helps in maintaining goods that are of direct values across various industries such as agriculture, medicine and other industries etc. Direct use values comes from the factor that these goods can be consumed directly or they can be used as resources where products of direct use values can be produced. 
On the other hand, indirect values can be referred to as services that support the items of direct values goods. For example, aesthetical values, cultural values, religious values etc. are of indirect values since one cannot directly extract the values from them.

**(c) What is biodiversity hotspot? Why is India considered as a mega biodiversity hotspot? (150 words)**

A bio – diversity hotspot is a biographic region where different levels of bio-diversity exist and is threatened with destruction. In order to signify itself as a hotspot, an area must contain at least 0.5 of endemic species. India is rich in bio – diversity due to its unique climate from north to south and east to west. Though environment in these regions may be different from one another, every region provides their own unique habitat as a result of which, in India, one can find many endangered species which couldn’t be found in any other country. 
It hosts four bio – diversity hotspots.
-	The Himalayas.
-	The western ghats.
-	The indo – Burma region. 
-	Sundaland including nicober islands .
Since India contains four bio – diversity hotspots out of 34 bio – diversity hotspots that are found across the globe, hence India can be considered as mega bio – diversity hotspots where one can find many rare species and plants throughout India in various places which are not to be found in other places. 

**(d) Describe the life forms of aquatic ecosystem found in different zones with suitable examples and diagrams. (150 words)**

There is various life form that are found in aquatic ecosystem in different zones. Global water covers three – quarters of the earth surface which can be divided in to three different types:
-	Fresh water ecosystem: lakes, ponds, swamps, pools, springs etc.
-	Marine water ecosystem: shallow seas and open ocean. 
-	Brackish water ecosystem: estuaries, salt marshes etc. 
The organism in these ecosystems can broadly divided in to different categories such as: 
-	Neuston: These are unattached organism found in floating plants and several animals. 
-	Periphyton: They remain attached or cling to stems and leaves of rooted plants emerging above the bottom mud. 
-	Plankton: This group constitutes of organisms such as algae and other animals primarily crustaceans and protozoans found in all ecosystem excluding swift moving water. 
-	Nekton: This groups consists of animals which can swim. The nektons are relatively larger in size since they need to overcome the water currents. 
-	Benthos: Those are found living in or bottom of benthic region of water mass. 

**(e) Differentiate between the surface and ground water. Describe the factors responsible for degradation of water. (150 words)**

Ground water is accumulated when water which falls in the form of precipitation moves down in to the soil and goes through rocks. This ground water can be utilized by digging out wells. This water can be found in two layers in soil. 
On the other hand, surface water includes water streams, ponds, lakes, human made reservoirs and canals and fresh water wetlands. The surface water can be considered as renewable sources even though they depend upon other sources of water. 
The degradation of water resources have been a growing concern for the entire environment. Most of the source of water such as ponds, lakes, river etc are facing the issue of pollution due to various human activities such as throwing waste products in to the water of river, lake etc. Intensive industrialization, urbanization and deforestation have also made the pollution of the water much severe. It is not only causing destructive effect in human consumption but also have threatened the existence of aquatic life forms. 

**Write a short note on nitrogen cycle with the help of a diagram (150 words)**

Nitrogen is an essential component of protein which is a building block of various living organisms. It constitutes nearly 16% by weight in proteins. The atmosphere consists of inexhaustible amount of nitrogen but this form cannot be directly utilized by living organisms. Nitrogen fixation is the process by which a living organism can extract nitrogen from other sources. It occurs via three different processes. 
-	Via certain free living organism and blue green algae.
-	By human via industrialization process. 
-	To a limited amount by natural process such as lightning etc. 
In the process of nitrogen fixation, periodic thunderstorms covert the gaseous nitrogen into ammonia and nitrates which eventually reaches the surface of the earth by precipitation and enters the soil. This nitrogen can be utilized by plants. However there are certain living organism such as free living nitrifying bacteria, blue green algae who can utilized these by themselves. The ammonium ions can be also directly taken up by the plants. Moreover ammonium can be oxidized in to nitrites or nitrates by different groups of bacteria thus causing nitrogen fixation. 

**Why is there a need for participatory forest management? How does Forest Right Act, 2006 helps tribal and forest dwellers? Explain with suitable examples in about 200 words**

The requirement of participation in forest management lies in the fact that in order to maintain the environment around us and to sustain the biosphere of living beings, forests are one of the most important factors. In order to accelerate the progress of the society, one may need to extract resources from nature but this should be done with utmost precaution. Hence, in order to decrease the intensity of deforestation, land reform rules are very necessary. Moreover, the rights of the indigenous forest dwellers and others who depend upon forest for their livelihood should be sustained. Keeping this view, Govt. of India has enacted Joint Forest Management Program. The requirement of inclusion of local people in these programs is very essential because local people will support the program only if they see economic growth amidst these green areas. 
Forest right act 2006: This act was enacted in order to recognize the forest rights and occupation in forest land dwelling scheduled tribes and other traditional forest dwellers who have been residing in such forests generations but whose right could not be recorded. This act also provides a framework for recording of the forest rights and nature of evidence required for such recognition and vesting in respect of forest land. This act addresses 	the long standing insecurity of forest dwelling scheduled tribes including those who were forced to relocate their dwelling due to state development interventions.  

**Critically evaluate non-polluting energy systems in India. Elucidate your answer with suitable examples in about 200 words.**

There are various non-polluting energy systems in India which could help in reducing the pollution of the country without hampering any productivity of the people. Some non-polluting energy systems in India are as follows:
Improved Chulhas: In developing countries such as India, the energy needs of poor people in rural area is met by burning woods. Traditional method of such cooking is very inefficient and also not healthy. Moreover the smoke is also harmful for the environment. Indian energy scientists have come up with smokeless chulhas specially designed for Indian condition. These chulhas are smokeless and also requires less time for cooking thus saving energy. 
Energy from city Sewage: The city sewage treatment plants use anaerobic digestion units for extracting methane in the form of a sludge. The gas that is generated from this sludge is called sludge gas which can be considered as the biogas which could act as the energy source. There are various states in India where plants are setup in order to extract energy as such. 
Solar energy: Solar energy is a renewable energy source and harvesting solar energy in particular setups could lead to less dependency in fossil fuels. In recent years, these setups, which were very costly once, the prices have gone down and hence becoming more and more affordable. 
Wind Energy: Wind energy is another renewable energy. The energy from the wind could be converted to other forms of energy and thus can be utilized in various sectors. 

#### Explain the following terms in about 60 words each:

**Environmental justice:** It can be defined as the pursuit of equal justice and equal protection under the law for all environmental statutes and regulations without any discrimination based on race, ethnicity and socioeconomic status. The concept applies to governmental actions at all levels – local, state and central as well as private industry activities. Providing environmental justice goes beyond the stated definition and includes a guarantee of equal access to relief and meaningful community participation with government and industry decision makers. 

**Agenda 21:** This is a comprehensive, non – binding action plan for sustainable development. The document outlines actions to address the social, economic and environmental dimensions of sustainable development. The UN commission on sustainable development was created with the aim of promoting implementation of Agenda 21. 

**Greenhouse effect:** The solar radiation warms the Earth’s surface and the atmosphere. About one third of the radiation is reflected back to the space, about 20% is absorbed by the atmospheric gases and the remaining amount reaches the Earth’s surface which is absorbed by it. The energy so absorbed is remitted in the form of infrared radiation. The atmospheric gases absorb some of this radiation and hence do not allow all the emitted energy to escape into the space. Thus some of the heat is trapped by these gases and the atmosphere as a whole becomes warm. This situation is analogues to greenhouse which traps heat and its glass walls do not allow the heat to go out there by increasing the inside temperature. Therefore this effect is called greenhouse effect. 

**Climate change:** Climate change refers to long term shifts in temperature and weather patterns. These shifts can be natural such as through variations in the solar cycle. But since starting of the 18th century, human activities have been the main driver of climate change, primarily due to burning fossil fuels like coal, oil and gas. Climate change includes both global warming and its impact on Earth’s weather pattern. There have also been previous instances of climate change but the difference from that of with the current one is that, the current climate change is more drastic, rapid and not due to natural causes unlike the previous ones. 

#### Answer the following questions in about 150 words each.

**Explain any four impacts of improper waste disposal with suitable examples. (150 words)**

Improper waste disposal has drastic effect on human health as well as the environment. The usual practice of waste disposal includes insanitary open dump, landfilling, discharge into the water currents, open pit burning which are very harmful to the environment. There are many different routes via which these wastes could enter into the human body and can trigger its harmful effect. These routes are such as:
-	Direct ingestion through drinking water. 
-	Inhalation of contaminants that volatilize from heated water. 
-	Absorption through the skin during washing and bathing. 
-	Ingestion through goods that are derived from plants or animals which are exposed to those wastes. 
-	Absorption through the skin when handling contaminated soil. 
There are many negative effects of improper waste disposal. Such as:
-	Soil contamination: Various harmful waste contaminates the soil. 
-	Water contamination: Since water is an excellent solvent, the harmful wastes may dissolve in it thus making its way to human and other animals/plants. 
-	Air contamination. 
-	Harmful effect towards marine life. 


**What is Ozone Layer Depletion? Describe its effects. (150 words)**

The phenomenon of ozone layer depletion mainly considers two effects that have came to notice in early 1970s. These two effects are:
-	There is a steady lowering of about four percent in the total amount of ozone in Earth’s atmosphere. 
-	There is also a much larger springtime decrease in stratospheric ozone around earth’s polar region. This is also known as the ozone hole. 
There are various harmful effects of ozone layer depletion. Such as:
Effect on human and animal health: longer exposure to UVB can cause cataract and skin cancer in humans. UVB radiation also affects our immune system thus increasing the probability of the infectious diseases. 
Effect on plants: The UVB radiation also causes physiological changes and alters the development processes in plants. The photosynthesis in plants can get impaired leading to decrease in growth and quality of its products. It can also cause mutation in plants. Thus whole bio diversity can get affected due to ozone layer depletion. 
Effect on aquatic system: The UVB radiation is also harmful for aquatic animals and plants. Reduction in phytoplankton due to exposure of UVB will lead to decrease in fish productivity.  

**Describe the role of Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) as an institution for monitoring the pollution levels of environment. (150 words)**

To curb the pollution in our country, The central pollution control board (CPCB) was constituted on September 1974 under provisions of the water (prevention and control pollution) act, 1974. This board aims to:
-	To promote cleanliness of streams and wells in different areas of the states through prevention, control and abatement of water pollution. 
-	To improve the quality of air and to prevent, control and abate air pollution in our country. 
CPCB consults with various state boards to identify critically polluted area of the country which needs special attention for controlling pollution. Action plans have been prepared and are being implemented in those areas. The CPCB in collaboration with SPCBs monitor the quality of the fresh water resources of our country through a network. 

**How do collective actions help in addressing environmental issues and concerns? Explain. (150 words)**

Student groups and environmental campaigns are effective collective actions if organized properly. Collective action multiplies individual’s power as:
-	One can get encouragement and useful information from meeting regularly with others who share similar interests. 
-	When working individually, it is easy to get discourage by the slow work pace. 
-	Having a support group keep the enthusiasm in optimum level.
Student environment groups: Organization for school and college students could be among our most active and effective groups for environmental changes. By teaching them ecology and environmental ethics at elementary and secondary school level and by training them about environmental problems and their solutions, the purpose of environmental management could be carried out effectively. 
Organizing environmental campaign: It is the most effective tool to bring attention of the national and international planners, decision makers and managers towards a particular issue. It is a very dynamic process in which one must constantly adapt to the changing conditions. Some basic principle applies in most situations for organizing the environmental campaign. An environmental campaign should be inclusive of all stakeholders, should benefit common people and should be backed by scientific knowledge.

#### “Protected areas play a very important role in in-situ conservation of species.” Elucidate the statement with respect to present day context in about 200 words.

In-situ conservation deals with maintaining species in their natural habitats which is believed to be the best way to maintain the earth’s biological diversity. It also allows natural evolutionary processes to continue and for species to keep on adapting to their surroundings. However this needs good management practices and controlled land use to ensure the successes of conservation objectives. Thus, protected areas play a very important role in-situ conservation of species particularly threatened species by ensuring conservation of their habitat. 
When a location is selected the design of the preserved areas play an important role and is characterized by three important characteristics. Size, shape and connectivity. If the size of the preserved area is big it increases the number of the species contained in the preserved area. The rounder shape minimizes edge effects because the perimeter is smaller relative to the area inside than with other shapes. Connectivity between potential fragments allows members of the same species to immigrate and inbreed. The connections are also called corridors. Buffer zones are another important preserved characteristic. 
National parks are largely natural and unchanged by human activities. But many of them already had existing human impacts before they were designated for protection and human activities have often been allowed to continue. People have no rights in national park. The first wildlife sanctuary was the Vadanthangal Bird sanctuary near Chennai set up in 1878 though it merely formalized the traditional protection afforded by villagers for pelicans, herons, and other birds breeding at the place. 

#### ‘Polluted water is a threat to our health and survival of life forms” Explain it with respect to different agents of water pollutants in about 200 words.

Any physical, biological or chemical change that degrades the water quality results in water pollution. Water being a universal solvent can dissolve various types of substances in it. For this property, contamination of water is inevitable. Polluted water is a threat to our health and for survival of aquatic life and other forms of life. The pollution in non flowing water bodies like ponds, lakes and underground water becomes localized and confined, making it even more serious. The major human generated sources of water pollution are sewage, garbage and refuse, industrial and agricultural wastes like fertilizers and pesticides. 
There are various types of water pollutants such as:
Biological agents: Pathogenic organisms like viruses, bacteria and protozoan are serious water pollutant as far as human health is concerned. Cholera, bacterial and amoebic dysentery, gastroenteritis, typhoid etc. are water born human diseases.
Chemical agents: Chemical pollutants can be inorganic in nature like nitrates, phosphates, acids, salts and toxic heavy metals. Organic chemical pollutants include oil, gasoline, pesticides, dyes, paints, plastics, cleaning solvents, detergents. Radioactive substances that make the third category of chemical pollutants are released into water bodies as a result of processing of uranium ore and wastes from research laboratories. 
Physical agents: Suspended solids, sedimentary solids and temperature are the physical factors that affect the quality of water. These pollutants adversely affect water bodies by clogging waterways, filling the dams and making the water muddy. 

#### How do natural disasters as floods and cyclones adversely affect the lives and properties? Explain your answer with suitable examples in about 250 words.

Natural disasters such as floods and cyclones adversely affect the lives and properties. For example:
Adverse affect of flood: Floods are the most common of all natural calamities. Flood regularly claims thousands of lives and adversely affect millions of human beings annually worldwide. Bangladesh and India together account for over two-third of global death count each year. More than the loss of life and damage to property, millions of people are displaced every year due to floods in South Asian countries. 
A flood is a discharge of water that exceeds the canal capacity of the river. Floods are caused by different factors such as: Climate extremes, melting of snow or ice, collapse of dams, deforestation and landslides, silting of river beds reducing the carrying capacity of rivers, lack of coordination between officials of adjoining countries or states facing similar problems. 
Adverse affect of Cyclones: One of the most common coastal calamities is the cyclone. It claims many lives and cause immense damage to property every year. Cyclones are caused in the tropical belt when sea water gets heated up upto 27 degree centigrade or more. Here, low pressure areas develop above the water levels. The low pressure areas remain stationary for three to four days and drew energy from the sea surface. As the pressure in the center falls, the wind speed increases and cloud burst starts spiraling around the center causing squalls. As the pressure falls in the center, the winds in the surrounding areas rush inwards creating spirally moving storms. The cyclone then moves landward towards areas of lowest pressure. Strong winds and heavy rain destroy and annihilate whatever comes in their way. 
   

