---
layout: post
title: 'BEGAE-182 Assignment'
permalink: '/study/assignments/begae-182.html'
---


#### What do you understand by the term ‘non-verbal communication’ (150 words)

In our day-to-day life, a substantial portion of our communication is in the form of non-verbal communication. There are various types of non-verbal communication which broadly can be classified in to 9 categories. For example, 
 -	Facial expressions: a smile or a frown can convey various types of emotions to the audience and thus forms a perfect type of non-verbal communication.
 -	Gestures: Deliberate movements and signals form another type of non-verbal communication.
 -	Paralinguistics: It includes factors such as tone of the voice, loudness, inflection and the pitch which may convey messages that are not apparent in the words rather on these factors.
 -	Body language and posture: Body language and posture also carries lots of information
 -	Proxemics: It includes actions such as nodding head for the conveying of approval or dis-approval accordingly. 
 -	Eye gaze: Looking at the eye gaze of the people, one can realize happiness or hostility etc. 
 -	Haptics: Communication through touch is another form of non-verbal communication.
 -	Appearance: Sometimes our choice of clothing, color, hairstyle may also convey various messages. 
 -	Artifacts: Objects and images can also be used for example for communication which forms a significant portion of verbal communication. 

#### What are the conventions of a conversation? How does it differ from other speech events? (150 words)

In the subject of conversation, it is not merely an exchange of information rather when people do take part in it, there is assumption and expectation regarding the subject of the conversation, how it does develop, what sort of contribution are expected from each other etc. Hence, a conversation follows certain set of conventions which is reflected while people do converse. For example, 
Co-operative and politeness principle: A conversation should follow a co-operative manner so that other person could interpret the chained statements and understand the meaning of it. 
Adjancy pairs: This convention forms a pair where the latter one is a follow-up of the former one. 
Openings and closings: A conversation is different from other speech events for the fact that it has no specified settings and can occur at any time with no required roles other than the person involved in the conversation. 
Topic development: Topic development is another important aspect of conversation where people converse in coherent statements so that as a whole, they can contribute to the explanation of the subject. 
Turn taking: The conversation follows the pattern where it takes turn in order to express the subject matter by each individual though not an orderly manner. 
Repairs: It is to ensure that the recipient has correctly understood the meaning. 
A conversation differs from speech on many different aspects such as:
 -	Conversation does not require a fixed amount of people.
 -	No adjancy pairs, no immediate verbal takes place in speeches.
 -	There is no turn taking in case of speech. 


#### What is meant by the ‘schema theory’? How is it important in understanding the reading process? (150 words)

The schema theory is a strategy by readers in order to understand the subject in a deeper level while applying the experiences that they have garnered while living day to day life. In this strategy, the readers use existing knowledge about different subject so that they can comprehend the text more appropriately. The fundamental principle of schema theory lies on the basic factor that it assumes written text does not carry meaning by itself rather it only provides a direction for readers as to how they should extract the meaning while applying their own experiences. According to the schema theory, comprehending text is a dynamic process which is constituted by various other linked processes. For example, while reading a passage, there exists a dynamic interaction between readers background knowledge and the actual text of the passage. Readers already acquire various knowledge and experience which does form a network or template with the help of which, while reading the texts, the mind fills in the gap in that network and tries to comprehend the meaning of it. 
Discuss any two difficulties that learners of English as a second language are likely to encounter while learning English vocabulary. (150 words)

While learning English as a second language, the beginners may face certain road blocks which may seem a bit difficult initially but mastering those will be always crucial in order to learn English same as with any other language. Among many difficulties that one may face while studying English, two are of the following:
 -	Homonyms: When the same word has many different meanings, then it is called homonyms. For example, the word “club” may convey different meanings depending upon which context it was used. It may be used as – 
    -	Association of people: As a child, you might have gone to a local club in your colony
    -   Implying heavy stick: 
    -	Clubs: one of the four suits in a conventional pack of playing cards.
    -   Combine: 
 -	Homophones: When two different words have the same sound but different form and meanings, it is called homophones. For example, Great and grate both are pronounced same while one implies to “of an extent, amount, or intensity considerably above average” while grate refers to “have an irritating effect.”
What are the four levels of meaning that you need to be aware of as a reader? (150 words)

In the cognitive level, a good reader operates at four highly interrelated and overlapping levels of meaning. These four levels of meanings are:
-	Literal
-	Interpretive
-	Critical 
-	Creative

Literal: It involves the reader to understand the information directly in a text. This information may be facts, details, sequences of events. The reader does not have to dig too deeply to comprehend it. It is of fundamental importance. 
Interpretive: In order to read at interpretive level, one has to read between the lines since actual meaning of the words may not be apparent unlike the literal ones. The reader has to construct various links together along with his own experiences in order to put two and two together in order to understand the whole passage. 
Critical: This type of reading requires making judgments with regard to a text. The reader may judge the validity of the text or the accuracy of the text or may be effectiveness of the style of the author. It also involves in giving reasons for judgement and the perspective that the reader is taking. 
Creative: It calls for generation of new ideas, insights, applications and approaches. 

#### You are attending an International Conference in your city. You have just met a participant from the U.S.A. Write out a dialogue in 10 turns where both of you get introduced to each other and discuss your expectations from the conference.

Me: Hello! Mr. Elijah, Welcome to the conference. 
Elijah: Thank you very much! It is nice to see you here too. How you have been through out these years?
Me: I am doing very good. I am sure you are finding it interesting here considering the subject of environment and global warming falls under your expertise. 
Elijah: Oh yes. Global warming subject always have intrigued me on deeper level and my belief is, more and more people should know about it since it will impact the lives of our next generation much sooner than we have anticipated. 
Me: I see. I’ve listened to the earlier speaker talking about greenhouse effect. I admit I have not yet dug deeper and only started to realize the various drastic effects. Can you tell me what actually is greenhouse effect?
Elijah: Sure…. The greenhouse effect is the gradual warming of the air around the earth as a result of heat being trapped by environmental pollution. 
Me: Oh…. That’s why the temperature of the earth is gradually increasing? What are the other effects that global warming may have?
Elijah: Well…. The effects of global warming can be very dangerous in the long run. It is predicted that midway through next century, the temperature of the earth may increase by as much as 4o c. 
Me: and what will happen if it raises by 4o c?
Elijah: This will greatly reduce the mankind’s ability to grow foods. Ice in the polar region will melt. 
Me: Will there be consequences of wildlife and wilderness?
Elijah: Of course, there will be consequences in wildlife too. It will damage the whole eco system and there may possibility that some species may even go extinct. 
Me: Oh, if it is that dangerous, why people are not aware much?
Elijah: I think it is mostly due to the reason that, until recently this subject wasn’t given due importance as it should have been given. But conferences like this one is a great start where we can share thoughts and also make others aware about global warming. 
Me: Coming to think of it, there must be some way to reduce the effect of global warming. Isn’t it?
Elijah: We have to reduce the emission of carbon di oxide which is one of the main causes of global warming. 
Me: I’ve heard that cutting down forests also have drastic effects on global warming. Is it true?
Elijah: Yes. Cutting down forests also have multi fold the problem of global warming that we are having. Due to reducing of forest areas, the greenhouse gases are getting more and more trapped inside our environment. 
Me: I have to go now for some errands but I would like to talk about it later on in the conference. It was nice meeting you here.
Elijah: Same here. Have a great day ahead. 

#### You have been invited to speak in a webinar for high school students on the topic: “Challenges faced by school students in India during the COVID-19 lockdown.” Write out your speech in around 250 words.
Answer: Speech on the topic challenges faced by school students in India during the COVID-19 lockdown. 
I, today would like to present my views on an emerging topic - “Challenges faced by school students during the COVID-19 lockdown.” 
As we already know, depending upon the severity of the situation, due to COVID-19, the schools and colleges have been closed down for a very long period time. This has created an instability in the field of education. Due to the closed down of the schools, the education system is finding it very hard to cope up with vide the digital medium.   
After the schools have been closed down, classes are held via online which isn’t feasible for everyone especially for those students that are living in remote areas. In order to attend online classes, one needs to have a fast internet connection along with a good device whether mobile/laptop which is very hard for people living in those areas. One student may be good at studies but if he is in villages, due to slow internet speed, he won’t be able to attend the classes and in the end; it will harm his progress. 
Moreover, not all classes can be held via online. For example, many subjects require lab experiments which is impossible at the current scenario of schools closed down due to wake of COVID-19 epidemic. These students are facing one of the hardest moments among the students since what they require to study, it isn’t feasible in any way. 
The poor students also do not have the means to buy mobile or subscribe to internet packs on monthly basis in order to attend classes. I believe various organization and govt must take some initiative to help those students at least so that their talent does not get lost amidst this closed down. 
Thank you. 

#### Discuss the semantic and linguistic barriers to communication. Give suitable examples

There could be various barriers which may put an impact in communication between different people. Out of those barriers, semantic and linguistic barriers are pretty common. 
Semantic barriers: The Semantic Barriers refers to the misunderstanding between the sender and receiver arising due to the different meanings of words, and other symbols used in the communication. For example, 
Ambiguity in expression: it is seen in almost every language where there are various words which has the same sounds in pronunciation but different meanings. Hence, the ambiguity arises when two people are in conversation as one may misunderstand what the others are talking about since both the words may sound same. For example, sea and see; site and sight; eye and I; weak and week etc. are examples of homophones which have similar sounds but different meanings. 
Misunderstood words: There may instances where may become a barrier since the use of a word may depend upon a context. The same word can carry different meanings when used in a different context which may become a bit difficult to the people for whom English is a second language. For example, homonyms are the type of words which have the same spelling but have very different meanings. “bat”, “bow”, “match” are some examples of homonyms where the words will carry different meanings depending upon the context that it was used which may not be apparently graspable by the non-native speakers of English language. 
Limited vocabulary: Limited vocabulary can also become a barrier of communication since, due to lack of appropriate words in the stock, one may go for another nearby one which may change the whole meaning of a sentence altogether. That is why, the importance of vocabulary is very significant while learning a new language. If there is lack of vocabulary, then there will be wrong translation followed by wrong interpretation which may become a primary barrier in communication with different people. 
Differences in expression: Due to different culture in different geographic region, it is evident that how people express themselves will also be different across the globe. Though this different style of expressing own self may create barriers in understanding another language since both the language may carry different ways of expressing yourself.  
Lack of information: Lack of information can also be barrier to communication since if someone doesn’t have sufficient grasp of the subject, then communication with that person can also be a bit difficult than the person who has even moderate grasp on the content. 
Excluding the above, there are other language barriers which can prevent building a good communication such as:
Dialects: While two persons can speak the same language, due to difference in dialects can also create barrier in terms of communication. For example, the Chinese have Cantonese and Mandarin dialects which are very different from each other and while two people may speak the same chinses language, these differences may come in to play while communicating. 

#### “Writing is commonly seen as three – way process: pre – writing, writing and re – writing. “Explain this statement. 

Writing is a process that can be broadly divided in to three different stages where each stage is aimed at reaching different objectives. These three stages are as follows: pre – writing, writing and re – writing. 
Pre – writing: Writing starts with the thinking about the topic that one is intended to write about including the purpose that is trying to be achieved while writing. In order to write in a concise while trying to attract more and more readers, one needs to have an extensive knowledge about the subject of the writing and this is the stage where one researches about various relevant topics with regards to the subject so that links of different topics along with the main one can be established in an understandable manner which can be grasped by all. If the subject is broad in nature, then this is the stage where one needs to break down it in to smaller pieces so that the focus can be put in to the most important aspects in the original subject. There can also be various guidelines while writing the project and one has to think forward about to limit the writing so that those guidelines could be maintained while writing about the subject. 
As the project progresses, there can be circumstances that may arise where one may need to change the direction of writing. Hence one needs to be prepared in the pre – writing phase so that if there is requirement to change the direction or guidelines later on, it could be accommodated without disturbing the flow in severe way. 
Writing: Once an outline has been established, one can actually write about the subject in hand with keeping in mind about the outlines that are drawn in the pre – writing stage. In the writing phase, one should focus on the content rather than writing flawlessly since if efforts are put much in to flawless writing, the focus may get distracted from the actual content itself. It is also important to give a break from time to time so that, the words that are being written could be seen from different perspective to analyze how readers might actually comprehend them differently. Thus, writing is one of the most important phases where the thoughts that one has in his mind is reflected through paper and ink.
Re – writing: This stage is the proof-reading stage. Whatever is written in the early stage, one will have to make sure that those words are coherent and the intention with what the passage/article was written, is indeed achieving the target. One has to also make sure that the standard that is expected from the article is also met along with other guidelines depending upon the circumstances. Thus re – writing constitutes an important stage in writing. 

#### A group of four students have been given the following topic for group discussion. “Internet usage by school students: Issues and Challenges” Write out the discussion giving at least 3 turns to each student.

Discussion between four students on the topic of “Internet usage by school students: Issues and challenges”
Student 1: In my opinion, internet gives the students ample opportunity to study in much better way since gone are the days when one had to buy costly books in order to learn something. The internet has given the platform to learn about any subjects for free if you know how to search for it. And hence, even the poor students can learn about subject without buying costly books. 
Student 2: Whilst I agree with the sentiment of student 1, I cannot deny the negative effects of internet too because just like it gives the platform to learn about any subjects, there could be subjects those students may search for which are not suitable for them. Hence, it can eventually harmful for them rather than being useful. 
Student 3: I kind of agree and disagree with the at the same time with both student 1 and student 2 because I believe that as a whole internet is just a tool. Just like any other tool, it will depend upon on what ways you will use it. If you will use the tool for good purpose, the outcome will be good or if you will use the tool for evil purpose, then the outcome will also be bad. 
Student 4: I think excluding the subject of good and evil, internet as a whole has very bright potential in any sector to be the medium in which people can communicate. After the invention of the social medias, the voices of the people have reached heights that was never seen before. Social media has not only been helpful to keep contacts with your friends and family but it has also given a platform to voice your opinions too regarding various other subject matter of day-to-day life. 

Student 1: Yes, and it also provides opportunity to get accustomed with other cultures in various countries. Previously, you could realize it only through eyes. But the invention of internet has made the whole world like a global village.
Student 3: Forums are a great platform to conversate with people from different parts of the world. When you interact with someone, you learn different aspects on the same subject. But cyberbullying is also common in these platforms which is an ugly side of the modern-day frameworks. 
Student 2: Cyber bullying is also another concern indeed. Though various laws have been implemented by various countries in order to curb it, there’s still much to do. And internet as a whole, isn’t a safe place. Your personal information could also leak put at any point of time if you are not careful enough. 
Student 4: But that doesn’t mean internet as a utility should also be curbed. We can teach people how to stay protected in the internet which is the best way to moved forward in my opinion. 
Student 3: It is indeed. Not to mention, during covid lockdowns, there are online classes that were hold which has saved years of studies for students as lack of which, they would have lost various years of their lives. It is the internet which has made it possible. 
Student 1: Online classes were pivotal for study during the pandemic era. Not only online classes but various seminars were also held during this time via virtual rooms due to which, many events could go on without any obstacles due to the pandemic. 
Student 2: But as mentioned earlier, the privacy issue is a great concern among these online platforms too where these classes were held. Due to lack of security, there were many instances where the virtual rooms got hacked. 
Student 4: That’s true but we all can agree to one fact that, in unforeseen circumstances such as covid – 19, internet has helped a lot during every aspect of life be it classroom or ordering foods online due to lockdowns etc. It will be an essential part of our lives. 
